update for ethernet connectivity (#1767)
arduino/docs-content: content/hardware/07.opta/opta-family/opta/tutorials/17.opta-mqtt/content.md

1. **Reliability**: CloudMQTT offers highly reliable infrastructure, ensuring the availability and security of your MQTT messaging services.
2. **Ease of Use**: With an intuitive user interface and advanced management tools, CloudMQTT simplifies the configuration and monitoring of your MQTT brokers.
3. **Security**: CloudMQTT offers advanced security options, including encryption of data in transit and at rest, to protect your MQTT communications.
4. **Integration with Other Services**: The platform seamlessly integrates with other cloud services, allowing you to create complex and interoperable IoT solutions.

**IMPORTANT**: The CloudMQTT service offers monthly paid plans based on the required resources, primarily aimed at businesses needing a stable and secure MQTT broker. The sketch shown at the end of the tutorial is adaptable to any existing MQTT service, whether in the cloud or locally.

## Software Instructions

### Arduino IDE Configuration

If you haven't already installed the Arduino IDE, you can install it from [this page](https://www.arduino.cc/en/software).

> Open the Library Manager from the menu **Sketch->Include Library->Manage Libraries**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Open the Library Manager from the menu **Sketch > Include Library >Manage Libraries**.
```

![Instance Dashboard on CloudMQTT](assets/opta-mqtt-tutorial-0012.png)

All the information needed to connect Opta™ to your MQTT broker is displayed on the current page and can be copied and pasted into your sketch within the **arduino_secrets.h** file.

- **Server** will be your MQTT host.
- **User** is the username to connect to your MQTT broker.
- **Password** is the password for the username.
- **Port** is the MQTT port required for connection, usually just use the one indicated in the **Port** field.

![Instance Info on CloudMQTT](assets/opta-mqtt-tutorial-0013.png)

In the next chapter, you'll focus on learning what the sketch does, how to configure it correctly, and how to upload it to your Opta™.

## Sketch

### Overall Code Analysis

You can download the complete example project from [here](assets/opta-mqtt-tutorial.zip).

After downloading the .zip file, extract it and open the .ino file inside.

![CloudMQTT Sketch](assets/opta-mqtt-tutorial-0014.png)

Briefly analyzing the code, at the beginning of the .ino file, there are the necessary library inclusions.

```cpp
#include <ArduinoMqttClient.h>   // Include the ArduinoMqttClient library to handle MQTT connection

> #include <WiFi.h>                // Include the WiFi library to handle WiFi connection

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#include <WiFi.h>                // Include the WiFi library to handle Wi-Fi connection
```

Reviewer: We should write the trademark Wi-Fi properly in code sections, but we don't need to use the `®` symbol here. I've update this in the places I found ⭐

#include "arduino_secrets.h"     // Include the arduino_secrets.h file containing WiFi and MQTT connection credentials
```

Then, two objects are created to handle the MQTT service connection.

```cpp

> WiFiClient wifiClient;           // Create a wifiClient object of type WiFiClient to handle WiFi connection

Reviewer: ```suggestion
WiFiClient wifiClient;           // Create a wifiClient object of type WiFiClient to handle Wi-Fi connection
```

MqttClient mqttClient(wifiClient);  // Create an mqttClient object of type MqttClient using wifiClient to handle MQTT connection
```

> The **setup()** function is responsible for establishing the WiFi connection and connecting to the MQTT broker.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The **setup()** function is responsible for establishing the Wi-Fi® connection and connecting to the MQTT broker.
```

```cpp
void setup() {

>   // Start WiFi connection using provided credentials

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  // Start Wi-Fi connection using provided credentials
```

    mqttClient.print("hello");

    // End the MQTT message and send it to the broker
    mqttClient.endMessage();
    
    delay(10000);  // Wait for 10 seconds before sending the next message
}
```

### Connection Configuration

In the attached sketch to this tutorial, you will find a support file called **arduino_secrets.h**, which contains the definitions that will allow you to configure the connection to the newly created MQTT broker.

![Sketch for credentials CloudMQTT](assets/opta-mqtt-tutorial-0015.png)

In this file, we can replace the data according to the information generated on CloudMQTT:

```cpp
#define SECRET_SSID "Your Network"               // WiFi network SSID (name)
#define SECRET_PASS "Your Network password"      // WiFi network password
#define MQTT_BROKER "hairdresser.cloudmqtt.com"  // MQTT broker address
#define MQTT_PORT 18486                           // MQTT broker port
#define MQTT_TOPIC "arduino/topic"                // MQTT topic to publish messages to
#define MQTT_USER "rygfvrup"                      // MQTT broker username (if required)
#define MQTT_PASSWORD "xxxxxxx"                   // MQTT broker password (if required)
```

> **MQTT_TOPIC ?** A "topic" is like a communication channel on which devices can send and receive messages using the MQTT protocol. It's akin to a topic of conversation: when a device publishes a message on a specific topic, other devices interested in that topic can receive and read the message. It's a way to organize and address messages in an IoT network, allowing devices to communicate in a targeted and efficient manner. For example, you might have a topic called "temperature" on which a sensor publishes temperature data and a control device receives them to regulate an air conditioning system. In this tutorial, we use the topic **arduino/topic**, which is not transcendental and can be customized as you prefer.

Reviewer: @mirkopac what does the `?` mean in the beginning of this section? Is it supposed to work like a `:`?

Reviewer: @mirkopac please see my comment here 🙏🏼

```

Then, at the end of **setup()**, we update the **previous_time** variable with the current milliseconds.

```cpp
previous_time = millis();  // Set previous time to current time
```

In the **loop()**, we track the elapsed time using the two variables **current_time** and **previous_time** within an if condition.

```cpp
void loop() {
  mqttClient.poll();  // Check for incoming messages from MQTT broker
  current_time = millis();                      // Get current time in milliseconds
  if (current_time - previous_time >= 10000) {  // If 10 seconds have elapsed
    previous_time = current_time; //Update previous_time with current_time
    // Begin a new MQTT message on the specified topic
    mqttClient.beginMessage(MQTT_TOPIC);
    // Add message content (in this case, "hello")
    mqttClient.print("hello");
    // End the MQTT message and send it to the broker
    mqttClient.endMessage();
    previous_time = current_time;  // Update previous time to current time
  }
}
```

The complete code might look like this:

```cpp
#include <ArduinoMqttClient.h>  // Include the ArduinoMqttClient library to handle MQTT connection

> #include <WiFi.h>               // Include the WiFi library to handle WiFi connection

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#include <WiFi.h>               // Include the WiFi library to handle Wi-Fi connection
```

> #include "arduino_secrets.h"   // Include the arduino_secrets.h file containing WiFi and MQTT connection credentials

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#include "arduino_secrets.h"   // Include the arduino_secrets.h file containing Wi-Fi and MQTT connection credentials
```

> WiFiClient wifiClient;              // Create a wifiClient object of type WiFiClient to handle WiFi connection

Reviewer: ```suggestion
WiFiClient wifiClient;              // Create a wifiClient object of type WiFiClient to handle Wi-Fi connection
```

  if (!mqttClient.connect(MQTT_BROKER, MQTT_PORT)) {  // If MQTT connection fails
    while (1)
      ;  // Halt program execution in an infinite loop
  }

  previous_time = millis();  // Set previous time to current time
}

void loop() {
  mqttClient.poll();  // Check for incoming messages from MQTT broker
  current_time = millis();                      // Get current time in milliseconds
  if (current_time - previous_time >= 10000) {  // If 10 seconds have elapsed
    previous_time = current_time; //Update previous_time with current_time
    // Begin a new MQTT message on the specified topic
    mqttClient.beginMessage(MQTT_TOPIC);
    // Add message content (in this case, "hello")
    mqttClient.print("hello");
    // End the MQTT message and send it to the broker
    mqttClient.endMessage();
    previous_time = current_time;  // Update previous time to current time
  }
}
```

This code will produce the same transmission effect already observed previously but with the advantage of keeping the **loop()** function free for other operations and avoiding interference with the synchronization necessary for connecting to the MQTT cloud.

> Of course, the "hello" message was used for example purposes; you can customize this message by sending the value of a sensor or other information based on your needs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The "hello" message was used for example purposes; you can customize this message by sending the value of a sensor or other information based on your needs.
```

Reviewer: I suggest to avoid phrasing such as "of course". We don't want to make the assumption that this is obvious to everyone. The sentence works just as well with this removed.

```cpp
int messageSize = mqttClient.parseMessage();  // Parse any incoming MQTT messages and get their size, if available
if (messageSize) {
  // If there is an incoming MQTT message (i.e., messageSize is not zero), execute the code inside this block
  // Read all available bytes from the MQTT client and append them to the 'message' String
  String message = "";
  while (mqttClient.available()) {
    char c = mqttClient.read();
    message += String(c);
  }
  // Check if the received message is "on"
  if (message == "on") {
    // If the message is "on", turn on the LED by setting its pin to HIGH
    digitalWrite(LEDR, HIGH);
  }
  // Check if the received message is "off"
  if (message == "off") {
    // If the message is "off", turn off the LED by setting its pin to LOW
    digitalWrite(LEDR, LOW);
  }
}
```

Your complete code might look like this:

```cpp
#include <ArduinoMqttClient.h>  // Include the ArduinoMqttClient library to handle MQTT connection

> #include <WiFi.h>               // Include the WiFi library to handle WiFi connection

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#include <WiFi.h>               // Include the WiFi library to handle Wi-Fi connection
```

> #include "arduino_secrets.h"  // Include the arduino_secrets.h file containing WiFi and MQTT connection credentials

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#include "arduino_secrets.h"  // Include the arduino_secrets.h file containing Wi-Fi and MQTT connection credentials
```

> WiFiClient wifiClient;              // Create a wifiClient object of type WiFiClient to handle WiFi connection

Reviewer: ```suggestion
WiFiClient wifiClient;              // Create a wifiClient object of type WiFiClient to handle Wi-Fi connection
```

    mqttClient.print("hello");
    // End the MQTT message and send it to the broker
    mqttClient.endMessage();
    previous_time = current_time;  // Update previous time to current time

  }
}
```

An important detail not to overlook is the **poll()** function of the MQTT client, which should be moved from the beginning of **loop()** to inside the time control if statement. The **poll()** function affects the reception of messages from the topic Opta™ is listening to. It's important that this function is called only when it's necessary to send messages from Opta™ to the broker and not continuously.

By uploading the new modifications, you can test to verify if the received message turns the red LED on Opta™ on and off based on its content.

In the WEBSOCKET UI interface, enter "arduino/led" in the **Topic** field and "on" in the **Message** field.

![Message from Broker CloudMQTT](assets/opta-mqtt-tutorial-0017.png)

Clicking the **Send** button will simulate sending a message from another device, and you should see the red LED on Opta™ turn on.

Similarly, by sending the "off" message, the LED should turn off.

### Using Ethernet for MQTT

> Opta™ allows you to connect to cloud services using Ethernet connection, leveraging a more stable and efficient connection compared to WiFi.
> 
> You can replace the portion of code related to WiFi connectivity with the necessary methods for Ethernet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Opta™ allows you to connect to cloud services using Ethernet connection, leveraging a more stable and efficient connection compared to Wi-Fi®.

You can replace the portion of code related to Wi-Fi® connectivity with the necessary methods for Ethernet.
```
